Just how far are we prepared to go when acting under the orders of someone else? 
It is a question that has been at the centre of a number of news stories. 
I have to admit that my usual reaction to such stories is to think that such things only happen to people with feet of clay and brains to match. 
It is certainly a lot more comforting than the alternative. 
Sitting in the office of a psychologist friend. 
The book recounts how. while at Yale University between 1960 and 1963. 
After being told that the study would look at the effect of punishment on learning. 
The recruits were then told to read out a list of word associations and to give the pupil an electric shock if he made mistakes. 
The experiment then began. 
The scientist in charge would instruct the recruit to deliver a shock at the next level of voltage. 
Although separated by a wall, the recruits could hear the pupil next door. 
And as the mistakes accumulated. so the protests from the room grew louder. 
And despite all the screams from the room next door almost two thirds of the recruits went all the way to the 450 volts long after the pupil’s screams had been replaced by an ominous silence. 
What the recruits did not know was that the pupil was a stooge. 
His experiment exploded many comforting myths women. 
Would more people act like she did now. 
However, it is an experiment unlikely to be repeated any time soon. 
For one can just imagine the lawsuits that would come from all those nice. 
The former British Astronomer Royal Richard Woolley assured us “All this talk of space travel is utter bilge”. 
In Scientific Blunders. Robert Youngson makes hay of scientific howlers in this impressively wide ranging collection of some of the most egregious errors that scientists. 
The lessons of the past teach us that. 
Not that the engine always runs smoothly. 
Far from it. 
There is often plenty of room for disagreement over what is a scientific fact. 
And there are ample opportunities for bullies and ignoramuses to win arguments through rhetoric rather than reason. 
The entire history of science is full of tales of rows. 
From the book’s title. Youngson appears wisely to have narrowed down his subject from the vast area of com mon or garden scientific error to the comparatively small domain of blunders. 
Aristotle. arguably the first scientist. 
Nor is George Bernard Shaw shown any mercy. 
The great Irish wag used his jesting to tease and annoy just about everyone. 
Youngson has done a good job of collecting tales of error and misjudgment. 
The concept of the scientific blunder is a great theme for a popular book. 
Youngson has responded with some splendid howlers. 
But by failing to illuminate how scientists continually exploit their errors in their quest for truth. 
Herbert Kelleher was the founder and chief executive of Southwest Airlines. 
Southwest enjoyed both profits and labor peace even in the worst years for the industry. 
He lost and was carried off on a stretcher with an intravenous line connected to a bottle of Wild Turkey. 
It was one of the few good laughs heard in the industry in years. 
The majority of scientists bask in the surviving afterglow of the Enlightenment. 
St Pancras is the terminus that time forgot. 
For years the Victorian fairy tale castle has stood half deserted in its Gothic sleep. 
Small scale enterprises common in the private. 
If any nutrient could use an image makeover. 
Women of child bearing age are routinely excluded from drug trials. 
The feather in the cap of 20th-century medicine is the prevention of infectious diseases. 
Measles. mumps and whooping cough can also be prevented with vaccines. 
It is, of course, well known that preventing or treating an infectious disease can have profound effects on the pathogenic organism that causes it. 
The evolution of drug resistant strains is the most famous example of such an effect. 
But now a new worry has emerged. 
It appears that intervening in infections may have undesirable effects on the hosts that is. 
